README.md, before:

```sql
SELECT '2017-01-01 00:00-6'::timestamptz;
SELECT '2017-01-01'::timestamptz;

SELECT '4/5/2017'::timestamptz;

SET datestyle to dmy;
SELECT '4/5/2017'::timestamptz;

SET datestyle TO DEFAULT;
SELECT '4/5/2017'::timestamptz;
```

```sql
SELECT now();
SET TIME ZONE 'Europe/Rome';
SELECT now();

SET TIME ZONE 'UTC';
SELECT now();

SET TIME ZONE 'PST8PDT';
SELECT now();

SET TIME ZONE DEFAULT;
SHOW TIME ZONE;
SELECT now();

SELECT timezone('UTC', now());
```

```sql
SELECT '1 day'::interval;
SELECT '2016-01-01'::timestamptz + '3 months'::interval;
```

```sql

SELECT to_timestamp(0);

SELECT timezone('UTC',to_timestamp(0));

SELECT extract(epoch from '2017-01-01'::timestamptz);
```

```sql

CREATE FUNCTION to_epoch(IN timestamptz, OUT float8) AS $$
    SELECT extract(epoch from $1);
$$ LANGUAGE SQL;

CREATE FUNCTION to_epoch(IN interval, OUT float8) AS $$
    SELECT extract(epoch from $1);
$$ LANGUAGE SQL;

SELECT to_epoch('2017-01-01'::timestamptz);
SELECT to_epoch('1 hour'::interval);
```

```sql

SELECT date_trunc('month', now());
```

```sql

SELECT '4713-01-01 BC'::timestamptz;
SELECT '4714-01-01 BC'::timestamptz;

SELECT '294276-01-01'::timestamptz;
SELECT '294277-01-01'::timestamptz;
```

```sql

SELECT st_dumppoints(geom) FROM superior100 limit 10;
SELECT (st_dumppoints(geom)).* FROM superior100 limit 10;
```

```sql

WITH t AS (SELECT st_dumppoints(geom) as dump FROM superior100)
SELECT 
    (dump).path[1],
    st_asewkt((dump).geom), 
    st_x((dump).geom), 
    st_y((dump).geom)
FROM t 
LIMIT 10;
```

```sql

DROP TABLE IF EXISTS superior100_points;
CREATE TABLE superior100_points AS 
WITH t AS (SELECT st_dumppoints(geom) as dump FROM superior100)
SELECT 
    (dump).path[1],
    (dump).geom, 
    st_x((dump).geom) as x, 
    st_y((dump).geom) as y
FROM t;
```

```sql

ALTER TABLE superior100_points ADD COLUMN z float8;

UPDATE superior100_points 
SET 
    z=round(st_value(rast,geom)::numeric,1)
FROM dem 
WHERE st_intersects(dem.rast,geom);
```

```sql

SELECT st_asewkt(geom), x, y, z FROM superior100_points LIMIT 10;

UPDATE superior100_points SET geom = st_setsrid(st_makepoint(x,y,z), 26915);
```

```sql

SELECT st_asewkt(geom) FROM superior100_points LIMIT 10;

WITH t AS (SELECT * FROM superior100_points ORDER BY PATH)
SELECT substring(st_asewkt(st_makeline(geom)),1,100) FROM t;
```

```sql

CREATE TABLE superior1003d AS
WITH t AS (SELECT * FROM superior100_points ORDER BY PATH)
SELECT st_makeline(geom) as geom FROM t;

SELECT path, x, y, z, z-lag(z) OVER (ORDER BY PATH) FROM superior100_points LIMIT 20;
```

```sql

ALTER TABLE superior100_points ADD COLUMN elchange float8;

WITH t AS (SELECT path, x, y, z, round((z-lag(z) OVER (ORDER BY PATH))::numeric,1) elchange FROM superior100_points)
UPDATE superior100_points p SET elchange=t.elchange FROM t WHERE p.path=t.path;

SELECT x, y, z, elchange FROM superior100_points limit 10;
```

```sql

SELECT 
    3.28 * sum(elchange) FILTER (WHERE elchange>0) as gain, 
    3.28 * sum(elchange) FILTER (WHERE elchange<0) as descent 
FROM superior100_points;
```

```sql

SELECT path, x, y, z, degrees(st_azimuth(lag(geom) OVER (ORDER BY path), geom)) FROM superior100_points LIMIT 20;
```

```sql


SELECT st_length(geom)/1609 FROM superior100;
SELECT st_length(geom)/1609 FROM superior1003d;
SELECT st_3dlength(geom)/1609 FROM superior1003d;
```

```sql


SELECT st_asewkt(st_lineinterpolatepoint(geom,.5)) FROM superior1003d;
SELECT st_asewkt(st_lineinterpolatepoint(geom,50*1609/st_length(geom))) FROM superior1003d;

SELECT
    a.aidstation,
    a.miles,
    a.miles/st_length(s.geom)*1609 as along_track,
    a.miles/103.2 along_total_distance,
    st_linelocatepoint(s.geom,a.geom) at_nearest_point
FROM
    aidstations a,
    superior1003d s
ORDER BY a.miles
;

CREATE TABLE sections AS
SELECT 
    aidstation,
    miles,
    st_addmeasure(
        st_linesubstring(
            s.geom,
            st_linelocatepoint(s.geom,lag(a.geom) OVER (ORDER BY miles)),
            st_linelocatepoint(s.geom,a.geom)
        ),
        lag(a.miles) OVER (ORDER BY miles),
        a.miles
    ) as geom
FROM
    aidstations a,
    superior1003d s
ORDER BY a.miles  
;

SELECT aidstation, miles, substring(st_asewkt(geom),0,100) FROM sections;

CREATE TABLE superior1003dm AS 
SELECT st_linemerge(st_collect(geom)) AS geom FROM sections;

SELECT substring(st_asewkt(geom),0,100) FROM superior1003dm;

DROP TABLE superior1003dm;
CREATE TABLE superior1003dm AS 
WITH 
p1 AS 
    (SELECT (st_dumppoints(geom)).* FROM sections),
p2 AS
    (SELECT geom, st_m(geom) FROM p1 ORDER BY st_m(geom))
SELECT st_makeline(geom) as geom FROM p2;

SELECT substring(st_asewkt(geom),0,100) FROM superior1003dm;

SELECT * FROM superiorsplits ORDER BY runnerid, aidstation LIMIT 20;

SELECT aidstation, min(split), avg(split), max(split) FROM superiorsplits GROUP BY aidstation ORDER BY min(split);

SELECT aidstation, min(split), avg(split), max(split) 
FROM superiorsplits 
WHERE finish BETWEEN '35 hours'::interval AND '37 hours'::interval
GROUP BY aidstation ORDER BY min(split);

CREATE TABLE bitner_goal AS 
WITH 
goalsplits AS (
    SELECT aidstation, avg(split) as goal
    FROM superiorsplits 
    WHERE finish BETWEEN '35 hours'::interval AND '37 hours'::interval
    GROUP BY aidstation ORDER BY min(split)
)
SELECT 
    aidstation,
    miles as miles,
    miles - coalesce(lag(miles) OVER (ORDER BY miles),0) AS miles_section,
    coalesce(lag(goal) OVER (ORDER BY miles),'0 hours'::interval) as goal_from,
    goal as goal_to,
    goal - coalesce(lag(goal) OVER (ORDER BY miles),'0 hours'::interval) AS goal_section,
    '2017-09-08 08:00:00 CDT'::timestamptz + goal AS goal_time,
    (goal - coalesce(lag(goal) OVER (ORDER BY miles),'0 hours'::interval)) 
    /  
    (miles - coalesce(lag(miles) OVER (ORDER BY miles),0))
    as pace_section
FROM
    sections JOIN goalsplits USING (aidstation)
;

SELECT * FROM bitner_goal;

CREATE TABLE bitner_goal_track AS
WITH
t1 AS (
    SELECT 
        st_addmeasure(geom, to_epoch(goal_from), to_epoch(goal_to)) AS geom
    FROM
        sections JOIN bitner_goal USING (aidstation)
),
p1 AS 
    (SELECT (st_dumppoints(geom)).* FROM t1),
p2 AS
    (SELECT DISTINCT ON (st_m(geom)) geom, st_m(geom) FROM p1 ORDER BY st_m(geom))
SELECT st_makeline(geom) as geom FROM p2;

SELECT substring(st_asewkt(geom),0,100) FROM bitner_goal_track;

SELECT * FROM superiorsplits 
WHERE aidstation='finish' AND finish BETWEEN '35.5 hours'::interval AND '36.5 hours'::interval LIMIT 20;

CREATE TABLE target_goal AS 
WITH 
goalsplits AS (
    SELECT aidstation, split as goal
    FROM superiorsplits 
    WHERE runnerid = 93
)
SELECT 
    aidstation,
    miles as miles,
    miles - coalesce(lag(miles) OVER (ORDER BY miles),0) AS miles_section,
    coalesce(lag(goal) OVER (ORDER BY miles),'0 hours'::interval) as goal_from,
    goal as goal_to,
    goal - coalesce(lag(goal) OVER (ORDER BY miles),'0 hours'::interval) AS goal_section,
    '2017-09-08 08:00:00 CDT'::timestamptz + goal AS goal_time,
    (goal - coalesce(lag(goal) OVER (ORDER BY miles),'0 hours'::interval)) 
    /  
    (miles - coalesce(lag(miles) OVER (ORDER BY miles),0))
    as pace_section
FROM
    sections JOIN goalsplits USING (aidstation)
;

SELECT * FROM target_goal;

CREATE TABLE target_goal_track AS
WITH
t1 AS (
    SELECT 
        st_addmeasure(geom, to_epoch(goal_from), to_epoch(goal_to)) AS geom
    FROM
        sections JOIN target_goal USING (aidstation)
),
p1 AS 
    (SELECT (st_dumppoints(geom)).* FROM t1),
p2 AS
    (SELECT DISTINCT ON (st_m(geom)) geom, st_m(geom) FROM p1 ORDER BY st_m(geom))
SELECT st_makeline(geom) as geom FROM p2;

SELECT substring(st_asewkt(geom),0,100) FROM target_goal_track;

SELECT st_isvalidtrajectory(geom) FROM bitner_goal_track;
SELECT st_isvalidtrajectory(geom) FROM target_goal_track;

SELECT (st_closestpointofapproach(
    (SELECT st_linesubstring(geom,.5,1) FROM bitner_goal_track),
    (SELECT st_linesubstring(geom,.5,1) FROM target_goal_track)
)::text || ' seconds')::interval;

SELECT st_distancecpa(
    (SELECT st_linesubstring(geom,.5,1) FROM bitner_goal_track),
    (SELECT st_linesubstring(geom,.5,1) FROM target_goal_track)
);

```

Commit message:

Saved README.md with Dillinger.io [skip ci]

README.md, after:

# Breaking the 4th dimension: working with time in PostgreSQL and PostGIS

FOSS4G 2017
David Bitner
Senior Development Engineer
Boundless Spatial
dbitner@boundlessgeo.com



```sql
SELECT '2017-01-01 00:00-6'::timestamptz;
SELECT '2017-01-01'::timestamptz;

SELECT '4/5/2017'::timestamptz;

SET datestyle to dmy;
SELECT '4/5/2017'::timestamptz;

SET datestyle TO DEFAULT;
SELECT '4/5/2017'::timestamptz;
```

```sql
SELECT now();
SET TIME ZONE 'Europe/Rome';
SELECT now();

SET TIME ZONE 'UTC';
SELECT now();

SET TIME ZONE 'PST8PDT';
SELECT now();

SET TIME ZONE DEFAULT;
SHOW TIME ZONE;
SELECT now();

SELECT timezone('UTC', now());
```

```sql
SELECT '1 day'::interval;
SELECT '2016-01-01'::timestamptz + '3 months'::interval;
```

```sql

SELECT to_timestamp(0);

SELECT timezone('UTC',to_timestamp(0));

SELECT extract(epoch from '2017-01-01'::timestamptz);
```

```sql

CREATE FUNCTION to_epoch(IN timestamptz, OUT float8) AS $$
    SELECT extract(epoch from $1);
$$ LANGUAGE SQL;

CREATE FUNCTION to_epoch(IN interval, OUT float8) AS $$
    SELECT extract(epoch from $1);
$$ LANGUAGE SQL;

SELECT to_epoch('2017-01-01'::timestamptz);
SELECT to_epoch('1 hour'::interval);
```

```sql

SELECT date_trunc('month', now());
```

```sql

SELECT '4713-01-01 BC'::timestamptz;
SELECT '4714-01-01 BC'::timestamptz;

SELECT '294276-01-01'::timestamptz;
SELECT '294277-01-01'::timestamptz;
```

```sql

SELECT st_dumppoints(geom) FROM superior100 limit 10;
SELECT (st_dumppoints(geom)).* FROM superior100 limit 10;
```

```sql

WITH t AS (SELECT st_dumppoints(geom) as dump FROM superior100)
SELECT 
    (dump).path[1],
    st_asewkt((dump).geom), 
    st_x((dump).geom), 
    st_y((dump).geom)
FROM t 
LIMIT 10;
```

```sql

DROP TABLE IF EXISTS superior100_points;
CREATE TABLE superior100_points AS 
WITH t AS (SELECT st_dumppoints(geom) as dump FROM superior100)
SELECT 
    (dump).path[1],
    (dump).geom, 
    st_x((dump).geom) as x, 
    st_y((dump).geom) as y
FROM t;
```

```sql

ALTER TABLE superior100_points ADD COLUMN z float8;

UPDATE superior100_points 
SET 
    z=round(st_value(rast,geom)::numeric,1)
FROM dem 
WHERE st_intersects(dem.rast,geom);
```

```sql

SELECT st_asewkt(geom), x, y, z FROM superior100_points LIMIT 10;

UPDATE superior100_points SET geom = st_setsrid(st_makepoint(x,y,z), 26915);
```

```sql

SELECT st_asewkt(geom) FROM superior100_points LIMIT 10;

WITH t AS (SELECT * FROM superior100_points ORDER BY PATH)
SELECT substring(st_asewkt(st_makeline(geom)),1,100) FROM t;
```

```sql

CREATE TABLE superior1003d AS
WITH t AS (SELECT * FROM superior100_points ORDER BY PATH)
SELECT st_makeline(geom) as geom FROM t;

SELECT path, x, y, z, z-lag(z) OVER (ORDER BY PATH) FROM superior100_points LIMIT 20;
```

```sql

ALTER TABLE superior100_points ADD COLUMN elchange float8;

WITH t AS (SELECT path, x, y, z, round((z-lag(z) OVER (ORDER BY PATH))::numeric,1) elchange FROM superior100_points)
UPDATE superior100_points p SET elchange=t.elchange FROM t WHERE p.path=t.path;

SELECT x, y, z, elchange FROM superior100_points limit 10;
```

```sql

SELECT 
    3.28 * sum(elchange) FILTER (WHERE elchange>0) as gain, 
    3.28 * sum(elchange) FILTER (WHERE elchange<0) as descent 
FROM superior100_points;
```

```sql

SELECT path, x, y, z, degrees(st_azimuth(lag(geom) OVER (ORDER BY path), geom)) FROM superior100_points LIMIT 20;
```

```sql


SELECT st_length(geom)/1609 FROM superior100;
SELECT st_length(geom)/1609 FROM superior1003d;
SELECT st_3dlength(geom)/1609 FROM superior1003d;
```

```sql


SELECT st_asewkt(st_lineinterpolatepoint(geom,.5)) FROM superior1003d;
SELECT st_asewkt(st_lineinterpolatepoint(geom,50*1609/st_length(geom))) FROM superior1003d;

SELECT
    a.aidstation,
    a.miles,
    a.miles/st_length(s.geom)*1609 as along_track,
    a.miles/103.2 along_total_distance,
    st_linelocatepoint(s.geom,a.geom) at_nearest_point
FROM
    aidstations a,
    superior1003d s
ORDER BY a.miles
;

CREATE TABLE sections AS
SELECT 
    aidstation,
    miles,
    st_addmeasure(
        st_linesubstring(
            s.geom,
            st_linelocatepoint(s.geom,lag(a.geom) OVER (ORDER BY miles)),
            st_linelocatepoint(s.geom,a.geom)
        ),
        lag(a.miles) OVER (ORDER BY miles),
        a.miles
    ) as geom
FROM
    aidstations a,
    superior1003d s
ORDER BY a.miles  
;

SELECT aidstation, miles, substring(st_asewkt(geom),0,100) FROM sections;

CREATE TABLE superior1003dm AS 
SELECT st_linemerge(st_collect(geom)) AS geom FROM sections;

SELECT substring(st_asewkt(geom),0,100) FROM superior1003dm;

DROP TABLE superior1003dm;
CREATE TABLE superior1003dm AS 
WITH 
p1 AS 
    (SELECT (st_dumppoints(geom)).* FROM sections),
p2 AS
    (SELECT geom, st_m(geom) FROM p1 ORDER BY st_m(geom))
SELECT st_makeline(geom) as geom FROM p2;

SELECT substring(st_asewkt(geom),0,100) FROM superior1003dm;

SELECT * FROM superiorsplits ORDER BY runnerid, aidstation LIMIT 20;

SELECT aidstation, min(split), avg(split), max(split) FROM superiorsplits GROUP BY aidstation ORDER BY min(split);

SELECT aidstation, min(split), avg(split), max(split) 
FROM superiorsplits 
WHERE finish BETWEEN '35 hours'::interval AND '37 hours'::interval
GROUP BY aidstation ORDER BY min(split);

CREATE TABLE bitner_goal AS 
WITH 
goalsplits AS (
    SELECT aidstation, avg(split) as goal
    FROM superiorsplits 
    WHERE finish BETWEEN '35 hours'::interval AND '37 hours'::interval
    GROUP BY aidstation ORDER BY min(split)
)
SELECT 
    aidstation,
    miles as miles,
    miles - coalesce(lag(miles) OVER (ORDER BY miles),0) AS miles_section,
    coalesce(lag(goal) OVER (ORDER BY miles),'0 hours'::interval) as goal_from,
    goal as goal_to,
    goal - coalesce(lag(goal) OVER (ORDER BY miles),'0 hours'::interval) AS goal_section,
    '2017-09-08 08:00:00 CDT'::timestamptz + goal AS goal_time,
    (goal - coalesce(lag(goal) OVER (ORDER BY miles),'0 hours'::interval)) 
    /  
    (miles - coalesce(lag(miles) OVER (ORDER BY miles),0))
    as pace_section
FROM
    sections JOIN goalsplits USING (aidstation)
;

SELECT * FROM bitner_goal;

CREATE TABLE bitner_goal_track AS
WITH
t1 AS (
    SELECT 
        st_addmeasure(geom, to_epoch(goal_from), to_epoch(goal_to)) AS geom
    FROM
        sections JOIN bitner_goal USING (aidstation)
),
p1 AS 
    (SELECT (st_dumppoints(geom)).* FROM t1),
p2 AS
    (SELECT DISTINCT ON (st_m(geom)) geom, st_m(geom) FROM p1 ORDER BY st_m(geom))
SELECT st_makeline(geom) as geom FROM p2;

SELECT substring(st_asewkt(geom),0,100) FROM bitner_goal_track;

SELECT * FROM superiorsplits 
WHERE aidstation='finish' AND finish BETWEEN '35.5 hours'::interval AND '36.5 hours'::interval LIMIT 20;

CREATE TABLE target_goal AS 
WITH 
goalsplits AS (
    SELECT aidstation, split as goal
    FROM superiorsplits 
    WHERE runnerid = 93
)
SELECT 
    aidstation,
    miles as miles,
    miles - coalesce(lag(miles) OVER (ORDER BY miles),0) AS miles_section,
    coalesce(lag(goal) OVER (ORDER BY miles),'0 hours'::interval) as goal_from,
    goal as goal_to,
    goal - coalesce(lag(goal) OVER (ORDER BY miles),'0 hours'::interval) AS goal_section,
    '2017-09-08 08:00:00 CDT'::timestamptz + goal AS goal_time,
    (goal - coalesce(lag(goal) OVER (ORDER BY miles),'0 hours'::interval)) 
    /  
    (miles - coalesce(lag(miles) OVER (ORDER BY miles),0))
    as pace_section
FROM
    sections JOIN goalsplits USING (aidstation)
;

SELECT * FROM target_goal;

CREATE TABLE target_goal_track AS
WITH
t1 AS (
    SELECT 
        st_addmeasure(geom, to_epoch(goal_from), to_epoch(goal_to)) AS geom
    FROM
        sections JOIN target_goal USING (aidstation)
),
p1 AS 
    (SELECT (st_dumppoints(geom)).* FROM t1),
p2 AS
    (SELECT DISTINCT ON (st_m(geom)) geom, st_m(geom) FROM p1 ORDER BY st_m(geom))
SELECT st_makeline(geom) as geom FROM p2;

SELECT substring(st_asewkt(geom),0,100) FROM target_goal_track;

SELECT st_isvalidtrajectory(geom) FROM bitner_goal_track;
SELECT st_isvalidtrajectory(geom) FROM target_goal_track;

SELECT (st_closestpointofapproach(
    (SELECT st_linesubstring(geom,.5,1) FROM bitner_goal_track),
    (SELECT st_linesubstring(geom,.5,1) FROM target_goal_track)
)::text || ' seconds')::interval;

SELECT st_distancecpa(
    (SELECT st_linesubstring(geom,.5,1) FROM bitner_goal_track),
    (SELECT st_linesubstring(geom,.5,1) FROM target_goal_track)
);

```
